Add new GroupControllerService and VolumeGroupSnapshot CSI RPCs (#519)
container-storage-interface/spec: spec.md

    }
}

service GroupController {
  option (alpha_service) = true;

  rpc GroupControllerGetCapabilities (
        GroupControllerGetCapabilitiesRequest)
    returns (GroupControllerGetCapabilitiesResponse) {}

  rpc CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot(CreateVolumeGroupSnapshotRequest)
    returns (CreateVolumeGroupSnapshotResponse) {
        option (alpha_method) = true;
    }

  rpc DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshot(DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshotRequest)
    returns (DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshotResponse) {
        option (alpha_method) = true;
    }

>   rpc ControllerGetVolumeGroupSnapshot(

Reviewer: why is this RPC prefixed w/ `Controller` but not the others?

Author: This is following "ControllerGetVolume", but I can drop "Controller".

    }
}

> service GroupController {

Reviewer: missing rpc "GroupControllerGetCapabilities" ?

      // returned by NodeGetInfo to ensure that a given volume is
      // accessible from a given node when scheduling workloads.
      VOLUME_ACCESSIBILITY_CONSTRAINTS = 2;

>       // GROUP_CONTROLLER_SERVICE indicates that the Plugin provides
>       // RPCs for the GroupControllerService. Plugins MAY provide this
>       // capability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      // GROUP_CONTROLLER_SERVICE indicates that the Plugin provides
      // RPCs for operating on groups of volumes. Plugins MAY provide this
      // capability.
```

Author: Done

>       // The presence of this capability determines whether the CO will
>       // attempt to invoke the REQUIRED GroupControllerService RPCs, as
>       // well as specific RPCs as indicated by
>       // GroupControllerGetCapabilities.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      // The presence of this capability determines whether the CO will
      // attempt to invoke the REQUIRED GroupController service RPCs, as
      // well as specific RPCs as indicated by
      // GroupControllerGetCapabilities.
```

Author: Done

  // VOLUME_ACCESSIBILITY_CONSTRAINTS plugin capability, the SP MAY
  // choose where the provisioned volume is accessible from.
  TopologyRequirement accessibility_requirements = 7;

  // The IDs of the volume groups where the volume will be added to.
  // Note that it is possible for a volume to be placed in one or more
  // groups on the storage backend even if this field is not specified.
  // This field is OPTIONAL.

>   repeated string volume_group_id = 8 [(alpha_field) = true];

Author: I forgot to remove this.  Let me fix it.

Reviewer: > This is the place where we have the intersection. I added this for the optional field group_snapshot_id in message Snapshot which is in the ControllerService. Can the group_snapshot_id field in the ControllerService be dependent on a capability in GroupControllerService?

That seems *slightly* cleaner than a capability related to groups defined in the vanilla ControllerService. wonder if anyone else has thoughts on this?

Author: I removed capability from the ControllerService.

  repeated .csi.v1.Volume volumes = 3;
}
```

#### `CreateVolume`

TODO

#### `DeleteVolumeGroup`

**ALPHA FEATURE**

```protobuf
message DeleteVolumeGroupRequest {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // The ID of the volume group to be deprovisioned.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string volume_group_id = 1;

  // Secrets required by plugin to complete volume group deletion
  // request.
  // This field is OPTIONAL. Refer to the `Secrets Requirements`
  // section on how to use this field.
  map<string, string> secrets = 2 [(csi_secret) = true];
}

message DeleteVolumeGroupResponse {
  option (alpha_message) = true;
  // Intentionally empty.
}
```

#### `ModifyVolumeGroup`

**ALPHA FEATURE**

This RPC will be called by the CO to modify an existing volumegroup on behalf of a user. volume_ids provided in the ModifyVolumeGroupRequest will be compared to the ones in the existing VolumeGroup. New volume_ids in the modified VolumeGroup will be added to the VolumeGroup. Existing volume_ids not in the modified VolumeGroup will be removed from the VolumeGroup. If volume_ids is empty, the VolumeGroup will be removed of all existing volumes. This operation MUST be idempotent.

> To support ModifyVolumeGroup, the Kubernetes VolumeGroup controller will be implemented to have a desired state of the world and an actual state of the world. The desired state of the world contains VolumeGroups with the desired PVCList while the actual state of the world contains VolumeGroups with the actual PVCList. The controller will try to reconcile the two by handling adding and removing multiple PVCs through a single CSI RPC call each time.

Reviewer 3: This is very Kubernetes specific, I don't think it is suitable to mention in the CSI spec. Maybe phrase it like

> To support ModifyVolumeGroup, a CO implement to have a desired state of the world and an actual state of the world.

_PVCList_ should probably be more like _list of volume-IDs_

> Note that filesystems based storage systems may not be able to support this RPC. For block based storage systems, this is a very convenient method. However, it may not satisfy the requirement for consistency as the volume is created without the knowledge of which group it is placed in. It is out of the scope of the CSI spec to determine whether a group is consistent or not. It is up to the storage provider to clarify that in the vendor specific documentation.

Reviewer 3: Great note about the consistency! It is important to be clear that VolumeGroups are not "Consistency Groups, but vendors may want to use their "consistency group" feature to implement VolumeGroups.

I think it would be good to describe possible error values here.

- a volume was added that is incompatible with other volumes in the group
- group can not add more volumes, too many volumes, or group too small, maximum volume reached

Author: Good point.  Added error codes.

CSI drivers supporting VOLUME_GROUP_ADD_REMOVE_EXISTING_VOLUME MUST implement ModifyVolumeGroup RPC.

```protobuf
message ModifyVolumeGroupRequest {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // The ID of the volume group to be modified.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string volume_group_id = 1;

  // Specify volume_ids that will be in the modified volume group.
  // This list will be compared with the volume_ids in the existing
  // group.
  // New ones will be added and missing ones will be removed.
  // If no volume_ids are provided, all existing volumes will
  // be removed from the group.
  // This field is OPTIONAL.

>   repeated string volume_ids = 3;

Reviewer 3: Where is `2` ?

Can this include secrets? Would also be useful for other procedures.

Create a new volume group from a source group.
Create a new volume group and add a list of existing volumes to the group.

Non goal:
Create a new group and at the same time create a list of new volumes in the group.

```protobuf
message CreateVolumeGroupRequest {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // suggested name for volume group (required for idempotency)
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string name = 1;

  // params passed from VolumeGroupClass
  // This field is OPTIONAL.
  map<string, string> parameters = 2;

  // Secrets required by plugin to complete volume group creation
  // request.
  // This field is OPTIONAL. Refer to the `Secrets Requirements`
  // section on how to use this field.
  map<string, string> secrets = 3 [(csi_secret) = true];
}

message CreateVolumeGroupResponse {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // Contains all attributes of the newly created volume group.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  VolumeGroup volume_group = 1;
}

message VolumeGroup {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // The identifier for this volume group, generated by the plugin.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string volume_group_id = 1;

> 

Reviewer 4: I would suggest adding the Name field assigned the VolumeGroup as part of the VolumeGroup response, especially since the Name field in CreateVolumeGroupRequest is only "suggested", so it's impossible to know definitively what the Name turned out to be. However I compared this with the Volume response and it doesn't return the Name either so you are consistent.

}

message ControllerGetVolumeGroupSnapshotResponse {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // This field is REQUIRED
  VolumeGroupSnapshot group_snapshot = 1;
}
```

##### ControllerGetVolumeGroupSnapshot Errors

If the plugin is unable to complete the ControllerGetVolumeGroupSnapshot call successfully, it MUST return a non-ok gRPC code in the gRPC status.
If the conditions defined below are encountered, the plugin MUST return the specified gRPC error code.
The CO MUST implement the specified error recovery behavior when it encounters the gRPC error code.

| Condition | gRPC Code | Description | Recovery Behavior |
|-----------|-----------|-------------|-------------------|
| Volume group snapshot does not exist | 5 NOT_FOUND | Indicates that a volume group snapshot corresponding to the specified `volume_group_snapshot_id` does not exist. | Caller MUST verify that the `volume_group_snapshot_id` is correct and that the volume group snapshot is accessible and has not been deleted before retrying with exponential back off. |

#### `ListVolumeGroupSnapshots`

**ALPHA FEATURE**

```protobuf
message ListVolumeGroupSnapshotsRequest {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

> 

Reviewer 4: Would you want a capability here to list only the VolumeGroupSnapshots from a particular VolumeGroup, by specifying an optional volume_group_id?

Author: Good point.  Added.

Reviewer 4: Thanks.

**ALPHA FEATURE**

This RPC will be called by the CO to create a new volume group on behalf of a user. This operation MUST be idempotent. If a volume group corresponding to the specified volume group name already exists, is compatible with the specified parameters in the CreateVolumeGroupRequest, the Plugin MUST reply 0 OK with the corresponding CreateVolumeGroupResponse. CSI Plugins MAY create the following types of volume groups:

Create a new empty volume group.
After the empty group is created, create a new volume, specifying the group name in the volume.

At restore time, create a single volume from individual snapshot and then join an existing group.
Create an empty group.
Create a volume from snapshot, specifying the group name in the volume.

Future goals:
Create a new volume group from a source group snapshot.
Create a new volume group from a source group.
Create a new volume group and add a list of existing volumes to the group.

Non goal:
Create a new group and at the same time create a list of new volumes in the group.

```protobuf
message CreateVolumeGroupRequest {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // suggested name for volume group (required for idempotency)

>   // This field is REQUIRED.

Author: You might be reviewing an older version of the commit?  Since VolumeGroup RPCs are removed, this line is no longer in the current PR.

  string name = 1;

>   // params passed from VolumeGroupClass

Author: Same here.  You might be reviewing an older version of the commit? Since VolumeGroup RPCs are removed, this line is no longer in the current PR.

  // This field is OPTIONAL.
  map<string, string> parameters = 2;

  // Secrets required by plugin to complete volume group creation
  // request.
  // This field is OPTIONAL. Refer to the `Secrets Requirements`
  // section on how to use this field.
  map<string, string> secrets = 3 [(csi_secret) = true];
}

message CreateVolumeGroupResponse {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // Contains all attributes of the newly created volume group.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  VolumeGroup volume_group = 1;
}

message VolumeGroup {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // The identifier for this volume group, generated by the plugin.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string volume_group_id = 1;

  // Opaque static properties of the volume group.
  // This field is OPTIONAL.
  map<string, string> volume_group_context = 2;

  // Underlying volumes in this group. The same definition in CSI
  // Volume.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  // To support the creation of an empty group, this list can be empty.

>   // However, this field is not empty in the following cases:

Author: Same here.  You might be reviewing an older version of the commit? Since VolumeGroup RPCs are removed, this line is no longer in the current PR.

To support ModifyVolumeGroup, a CO controller MAY be implemented to have a desired state of the world and an actual state of the world. The desired state of the world contains VolumeGroups with the desired volume ids while the actual state of the world contains VolumeGroups with the actual volume ids. The controller will try to reconcile the two by handling adding and removing multiple volumes through a single CSI RPC call each time.

Note that filesystems based storage systems may not be able to support this RPC. For block based storage systems, this is a very convenient method. However, it may not satisfy the requirement for consistency as the volume is created without the knowledge of which group it is placed in. It is out of the scope of the CSI spec to determine whether a group is consistent or not. It is up to the storage provider to clarify that in the vendor specific documentation.

> CSI drivers supporting VOLUME_GROUP_ADD_REMOVE_EXISTING_VOLUME MUST implement ModifyVolumeGroup RPC.

Author: Done

    VolumeGroup volume_group = 1;
  }

  repeated Entry entries = 1;

  // This token allows you to get the next page of entries for
  // `ListVolumeGroups` request. If the number of entries is larger than
  // `max_entries`, use the `next_token` as a value for the
  // `starting_token` field in the next `ListVolumeGroups` request. This
  // field is OPTIONAL.
  // An empty string is equal to an unspecified field value.
  string next_token = 2;
}
```

##### ListVolumeGroups Errors

If the plugin is unable to complete the ListVolumeGroups call successfully, it MUST return a non-ok gRPC code in the gRPC status.
If the conditions defined below are encountered, the plugin MUST return the specified gRPC error code.
The CO MUST implement the specified error recovery behavior when it encounters the gRPC error code.

| Condition | gRPC Code | Description | Recovery Behavior |
|-----------|-----------|-------------|-------------------|
| Invalid `starting_token` | 10 ABORTED | Indicates that `starting_token` is not valid. | Caller SHOULD start the `ListVolumeGroups` operation again with an empty `starting_token`. |

#### `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot`

**ALPHA FEATURE**

> 

Reviewer: no CREATE_DELETE_VOLUME_GROUP_SNAPSHOT capability?

In VolumeGroupSnapshot message, snapshots is an optional field while group_snapshot_id is a required field. It is fine to only specify group_snapshot_id but not snapshots in VolumeGroupSnapshot message at restore time. However, the Plugin MUST return a list of volumes that are restored in CreateVolumeGroupResponse.

```protobuf
message CreateVolumeGroupSnapshotRequest {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // suggested name for a group snapshot (required for idempotent)
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string name = 1;

  // identifier indicates which volume group is used to take
  // group snapshot
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string source_volume_group_id = 2;

  // volume ids of the volumes in the source group. This field is
  // REQUIRED. This is needed because some storage systems does not
  // have a group persisted on the storage system until the time to
  // take a group snapshot
  repeated string volume_ids = 3;

  // secrets required for snapshot creation (pulled from

>   // VolumeSnapshotClass)

Reviewer: is this a k8s reference? if so, please drop it

  // This field is OPTIONAL.

>   map<string, string> secrets = 4 [(.csi.v1.csi_secret) = true];

Reviewer: why secrets?

>   // params passed from VolumeSnapshotClass

Reviewer: drop k8s reference

  // This field is OPTIONAL.
  map<string, string> parameters = 5;
}

message CreateVolumeGroupSnapshotResponse {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // Contains all attributes of the newly created group snapshot.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  VolumeGroupSnapshot group_snapshot = 1;
}

message VolumeGroupSnapshot {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // The identifier for this group snapshot, generated by the plugin.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string group_snapshot_id = 1;

  // A list of snapshots created. Snapshot is the same
  // definition as Snapshot definition used in CSI.
  // This field is OPTIONAL.

>   repeated .csi.v1.Snapshot snapshots = 2;

Reviewer: why the ".csi.v1." prefix?

Author: Dropped.

  // Identity information for the source volume group. Currently, only
  // support the case that source is volume group. This field is
  // REQUIRED.
  string source_volume_group_id = 3;

  // Indicates if a list of group snapshots are ready.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  bool ready_to_use = 4;

>   // Timestamp when the point-in-time consistency group snapshot is

Reviewer: do all backends support this? if a backend tracks time in "ticks" or some vector clock unit that doesn't translate well to timestamp .. when then? why does the CO care about this field?

Author: I'll remove the "consistency" part but keep the creation_time.  We have timestamp for individual snapshots already.

  // This field is OPTIONAL.
  int64 size_bytes = 6;
}
```

##### CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot Errors

If the plugin is unable to complete the CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot call successfully, it MUST return a non-ok gRPC code in the gRPC status.
If the conditions defined below are encountered, the plugin MUST return the specified gRPC error code.
The CO MUST implement the specified error recovery behavior when it encounters the gRPC error code.

| Condition | gRPC Code | Description | Recovery Behavior |
|-----------|-----------|-------------|-------------------|
| Group snapshot already exists but is incompatible | 6 ALREADY_EXISTS | Indicates that a group snapshot corresponding to the specified group snapshot `name` already exists but is incompatible with the specified `volume_id`. | Caller MUST fix the arguments or use a different `name` before retrying. |
| Not enough space to create group snapshot | 13 RESOURCE_EXHAUSTED | There is not enough space on the storage system to handle the create group snapshot request. | Caller SHOULD fail this request. Future calls to CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot MAY succeed if space is freed up. |

#### `DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshot`

**ALPHA FEATURE**

> 

Reviewer: CREATE_DELETE cap?

Author: Done

```protobuf
message DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshotRequest {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // The ID of the group snapshot to be deleted.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string group_snapshot_id = 1;

  // Secrets required by plugin to complete group snapshot deletion
  // request.
  // This field is OPTIONAL. Refer to the `Secrets Requirements`
  // section on how to use this field.

>   map<string, string> secrets = 2 [(csi_secret) = true];

Reviewer: why secrets?

Author: Same comment as earlier.

}

message DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshotResponse {
  // Intentionally empty.
}
```

##### DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshot Errors

If the plugin is unable to complete the DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshot call successfully, it MUST return a non-ok gRPC code in the gRPC status.
If the conditions defined below are encountered, the plugin MUST return the specified gRPC error code.
The CO MUST implement the specified error recovery behavior when it encounters the gRPC error code.

| Condition | gRPC Code | Description | Recovery Behavior |
|-----------|-----------|-------------|-------------------|
| Volume group snapshot in use | 9 FAILED_PRECONDITION | Indicates that the volume group snapshot corresponding to the specified `group_snapshot_id` could not be deleted because it is in use by another resource. | Caller SHOULD ensure that there are no other resources using the volume group snapshot, and then retry with exponential back off. |

#### `ControllerGetVolumeGroupSnapshot`

**ALPHA FEATURE**

> 

Reviewer: link to related cap?

Author: Done

```protobuf
message ControllerGetVolumeGroupSnapshotRequest {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // The ID of the group snapshot to fetch current group snapshot
  // information for.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string group_snapshot_id = 1;

  // Secrets required by plugin to complete
  // ControllerGetVolumeGroupSnapshot request.
  // This field is OPTIONAL. Refer to the `Secrets Requirements`
  // section on how to use this field.

>   map<string, string> secrets = 2 [(csi_secret) = true];

Reviewer: ?

Author: Same comment as before.

}

message ControllerGetVolumeGroupSnapshotResponse {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // This field is REQUIRED
  VolumeGroupSnapshot group_snapshot = 1;
}
```

##### ControllerGetVolumeGroupSnapshot Errors

If the plugin is unable to complete the ControllerGetVolumeGroupSnapshot call successfully, it MUST return a non-ok gRPC code in the gRPC status.
If the conditions defined below are encountered, the plugin MUST return the specified gRPC error code.
The CO MUST implement the specified error recovery behavior when it encounters the gRPC error code.

| Condition | gRPC Code | Description | Recovery Behavior |
|-----------|-----------|-------------|-------------------|
| Volume group snapshot does not exist | 5 NOT_FOUND | Indicates that a volume group snapshot corresponding to the specified `volume_group_snapshot_id` does not exist. | Caller MUST verify that the `volume_group_snapshot_id` is correct and that the volume group snapshot is accessible and has not been deleted before retrying with exponential back off. |

#### `ListVolumeGroupSnapshots`

> 

Reviewer: link to related cap?

Author: Done

**ALPHA FEATURE**

```protobuf
message ListVolumeGroupSnapshotsRequest {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // If specified (non-zero value), the Plugin MUST NOT return more
  // entries than this number in the response. If the actual number of
  // entries is more than this number, the Plugin MUST set `next_token`
  // in the response which can be used to get the next page of entries
  // in the subsequent `ListVolumeGroupSnapshots` call.
  // This field is OPTIONAL. If not specified (zero value), it means
  // there is no restriction on the number of entries that can be
  // returned. The value of this field MUST NOT be negative.
  int32 max_entries = 1;

  // A token to specify where to start paginating. Set this field to
  // `next_token` returned by a previous `ListVolumeGroupSnapshots`
  // call to get the next page of entries. This field is OPTIONAL.
  // An empty string is equal to an unspecified field value.
  string starting_token = 2;

  // Identity information for the source volume group.
  // This field is OPTIONAL.

>   // It can be used to list group snapshots by volume group.

Reviewer: if some backends cannot create snapshots w/o a list of volumes in the group, presumably the "list" API has the same weakness? if not, how does that make sense?

Author: This is an optional capability.  A backend can opt out if it can't support it.

      // SINGLE_NODE_SINGLE_WRITER and/or SINGLE_NODE_MULTI_WRITER are
      // supported, in order to permit older COs to continue working.
      SINGLE_NODE_MULTI_WRITER = 13 [(alpha_enum_value) = true];

      // Indicates the SP supports volume group snapshot

>       VOLUME_GROUP_SNAPSHOT = 14 [(alpha_enum_value) = true];

Reviewer: does this make more sense in the capabilities of the GroupControllerService? i.e. if there is no GroupControllerService, would it make sense for the ControllerService to advertise this cap? (IMO, no)

Author: This is the place where we have the intersection. I added this for the optional field `group_snapshot_id` in message Snapshot which is in the ControllerService. Can the `group_snapshot_id` field in the ControllerService be dependent on a capability in GroupControllerService?

Author: Removed VOLUME_GROUP_SNAPSHOT from the ControllerService.

  // `volume_content_source` in a `CreateVolumeRequest`. The default
  // value is false. This field is REQUIRED.
  bool ready_to_use = 5;

  // The ID of the volume group snapshot that this snapshot is part of.
  // It uniquely identifies the group snapshot on the storage system.
  // This field is OPTIONAL.
  // If this snapshot is a member of the volume group snapshot, the SP
  // SHOULD provide the ID of the volume group snapshot in this field.
  // If provided, CO MUST use this field to indicate that this snapshot

>   // is part of the specified group snapshot.

Reviewer 2: nit: Add guidance for CO if not provided but is part of a group.

Author: Added this:
  // If not provided, CO SHALL not indicate this snapshot is part of
  // a group snapshot and allow it to be deleted separately.

  // `volume_content_source` in a `CreateVolumeRequest`. The default
  // value is false. This field is REQUIRED.
  bool ready_to_use = 5;

  // The ID of the volume group snapshot that this snapshot is part of.
  // It uniquely identifies the group snapshot on the storage system.
  // This field is OPTIONAL.

>   // If this snapshot is a member of the volume group snapshot, the SP
>   // SHOULD provide the ID of the volume group snapshot in this field.
>   // If provided, CO MUST use this field to indicate that this snapshot
>   // is part of the specified group snapshot.

Reviewer 2: Based on `If not provided`, should this only be required if separate deletion is not supported? e.g.:

```suggestion
  // If this snapshot is a member of a volume group snapshot, and it
  // CAN NOT be deleted as a stand alone volume, then the SP
  // MUST provide the ID of the volume group snapshot in this field.
  // If provided, CO MUST use this field in subsequent snapshot volume 
  // group operations to indicate that this snapshot is part of the
  // specified group snapshot.
```

Reviewer 2: If you agree with this, should reword the additions under `DeleteSnapshot` as well.

Author: Updated.

I have the following in the DeleteSnapshot section:
```
Snapshots that are members of a group snapshot will be deleted when the group snapshot is deleted. The CO SHOULD NOT call this RPC with a snapshot_id for a snapshot that was created as part of a group snapshot, i.e. if the snapshot had a non-empty group_snapshot_id field at creation time. The SP MAY refuse to delete such snapshots with this RPC call and return an error instead.
```
Is there anything else you want me to add?

  // `volume_content_source` in a `CreateVolumeRequest`. The default
  // value is false. This field is REQUIRED.
  bool ready_to_use = 5;

  // The ID of the volume group snapshot that this snapshot is part of.
  // It uniquely identifies the group snapshot on the storage system.
  // This field is OPTIONAL.
  // If this snapshot is a member of a volume group snapshot, and it

>   // CAN NOT be deleted as a stand alone snapshot, then the SP

Author: Done

  // MUST provide the ID of the volume group snapshot in this field.

>   // If provided, CO MUST use this field in subsequent snapshot volume

Reviewer: nit: some places refer to "volume group snapshot" and this refers to "snapshot volume group" - let's be consistent, please

  // group operations to indicate that this snapshot is part of the
  // specified group snapshot.
  // If not provided, CO SHALL not indicate this snapshot is part of

>   // a group snapshot and allow it to be deleted separately.

Author: Done

This operation MUST be idempotent.
If a snapshot corresponding to the specified `snapshot_id` does not exist or the artifacts associated with the snapshot do not exist anymore, the Plugin MUST reply `0 OK`.

> This RPC MUST not be called if the `group_snapshot_id` field is not empty as individual snapshots that are part of a group snapshot will be deleted together with the group snapshot when the group snapshot is deleted.

Reviewer 5: How about this:

Snapshots that are members of a group snapshot will be deleted when the group snapshot is deleted. The CO SHOULD NOT specify a `snapshot_id` for a snapshot that was created as part of a group snapshot, i.e. if the snapshot had a non-empty `group_snapshot_id` field at creation time. The SP MAY refuse to delete such snapshots with this RPC call and return an error instead.

Author: Done

This operation MUST be idempotent.
If a snapshot corresponding to the specified `snapshot_id` does not exist or the artifacts associated with the snapshot do not exist anymore, the Plugin MUST reply `0 OK`.

> Snapshots that are members of a group snapshot will be deleted when the group snapshot is deleted. The CO SHOULD NOT call this RPC with a snapshot_id for a snapshot that was created as part of a group snapshot, i.e. if the snapshot had a non-empty group_snapshot_id field at creation time. The SP MAY refuse to delete such snapshots with this RPC call and return an error instead.

Author: Added this for the FAILED_PRECONDITION error code.

This operation MUST be idempotent.
If a snapshot corresponding to the specified `snapshot_id` does not exist or the artifacts associated with the snapshot do not exist anymore, the Plugin MUST reply `0 OK`.

> The CO SHALL NOT call this RPC with a snapshot for which SP

Reviewer: nit: one complete sentence per line

This operation MUST be idempotent.
If a snapshot corresponding to the specified `snapshot_id` does not exist or the artifacts associated with the snapshot do not exist anymore, the Plugin MUST reply `0 OK`.

> Snapshots that are members of a group snapshot will be deleted when the group snapshot is deleted. The CO SHOULD NOT call this RPC with a snapshot_id for a snapshot that was created as part of a group snapshot, i.e. if the snapshot had a non-empty group_snapshot_id field at creation time. The SP MAY refuse to delete such snapshots with this RPC call and return an error instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// The CO SHALL NOT call this RPC with a snapshot for which SP
// provided a non-empty group_snapshot_id  field at creation time.
// A snapshot for which SP provided a non-empty group_snapshot_id
// indicates a snapshot that CAN NOT be deleted stand alone.
// The SP MAY refuse to delete such snapshots with this RPC call and return an error instead.
// For such snapshots SP MUST delete the entire snapshot group via a
// DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshotRequest call. 
```

Author: Done

| Condition | gRPC Code | Description | Recovery Behavior |
|-----------|-----------|-------------|-------------------|

> | Snapshot in use | 9 FAILED_PRECONDITION | Indicates that the snapshot corresponding to the specified `snapshot_id` could not be deleted because it is in use by another resource or it is part of a group snapshot. | Caller SHOULD ensure that there are no other resources using the snapshot, and then retry with exponential back off. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Snapshot in use | 9 FAILED_PRECONDITION | Indicates that the snapshot corresponding to the specified `snapshot_id` could not be deleted because it is in use by another resource or it is part of a group snapshot and CAN NOT be deleted stand alone. | Caller SHOULD ensure that there are no other resources using the snapshot, and then retry with exponential back off. |
```

Author: Done

| Condition | gRPC Code | Description | Recovery Behavior |
|-----------|-----------|-------------|-------------------|

> | Snapshot in use | 9 FAILED_PRECONDITION | Indicates that the snapshot corresponding to the specified `snapshot_id` could not be deleted because it is in use by another resource or it is part of a group snapshot and CAN NOT be deleted stand alone. | Caller SHOULD ensure that there are no other resources using the snapshot, and then retry with exponential back off. |

Author: Changed to INVALID_ARGUMENT.

#### `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot`

**ALPHA FEATURE**

A Group Controller Plugin MUST implement this RPC call if it has `CREATE_DELETE_GET_VOLUME_GROUP_SNAPSHOT` controller capability.
This RPC will be called by the CO to create a new volume group snapshot from a list of source volumes on behalf of a user.

The purpose of this call is to request the creation of a multi-volume snapshot. Group snapshots can be created from the existing list of volumes. Note that calls to this function MUST be idempotent - the function may be called multiple times for the same name - the group snapshot must only be created once.

If a group snapshot corresponding to the specified group snapshot `name` is successfully created (meaning all snapshots associated with the group are successfully cut), the Plugin MUST reply `0 OK` with the corresponding `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshotResponse`.

If an error occurs before a group snapshot is cut, `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot` SHOULD return a corresponding gRPC error code that reflects the error condition.

`CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot` SHOULD return `0 OK` after all the snapshots are cut regardless of whether post processing such as uploading is complete or not.

> CO SHOULD check the `ready_to_use` boolean of individual snapshots that are members of the group snapshot and only treat the group snapshot as ready to use when all snapshots have been "processed" and is ready to use to create new volumes from those snapshots.

Reviewer 6: imo, this is actually an overkill/burden at CO side compared to group level flag, but well, we discussed this in detail already. :)

Author: Yes, this is discussed in https://github.com/container-storage-interface/spec/pull/519#discussion_r1068918404.

### Group Controller Service RPCs

#### `GroupControllerGetCapabilities`

A GroupController Plugin MUST implement this RPC call. This RPC allows the CO to check the supported capabilities of group controller service provided by the Plugin.

```protobuf
message GroupControllerGetCapabilitiesRequest {
  // Intentionally empty.
}

message GroupControllerGetCapabilitiesResponse {
  // All the capabilities that the group controller service supports.
  // This field is OPTIONAL.
  repeated GroupControllerServiceCapability capabilities = 1;
}

// Specifies a capability of the group controller service.
message GroupControllerServiceCapability {
  message RPC {
    enum Type {
      UNKNOWN = 0;

      // Indicates that the group controller plugin supports
      // creating and deleting a volume group snapshot.
      CREATE_DELETE_VOLUME_GROUP_SNAPSHOT = 1
      [(alpha_enum_value) = true];

      // Indicates whether the group controller plugin supports
      // creating a volume from an individual volume snapshot if the
      // volume snapshot is part of a VolumeGroupSnapshot.
      // Use cases: selective restore, advanced recovery, etc.

>       INDIVIDUAL_SNAPSHOT_RESTORE = 2 [(alpha_enum_value) = true];

Author: I think this probably does not make sense any more.  We don't have a VolumeGroup any more.  If there is an individual snapshot id, we should be able to create a volume from it.  I'll drop this capability.

      // Indicates that the group controller plugin supports getting
      // details of a volume group snapshot.
      GET_VOLUME_GROUP_SNAPSHOT = 3 [(alpha_enum_value) = true];

      // Indicates that the group controller plugin supports getting
      // details of a list of volume group snapshots.
      LIST_VOLUME_GROUP_SNAPSHOTS = 4 [(alpha_enum_value) = true];
    }

    Type type = 1;
  }

  oneof type {
    // RPC that the controller supports.
    RPC rpc = 1;
  }
}
```

##### ControllerGetCapabilities Errors

If the plugin is unable to complete the ControllerGetCapabilities call successfully, it MUST return a non-ok gRPC code in the gRPC status.

#### `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot`

**ALPHA FEATURE**

A Group Controller Plugin MUST implement this RPC call if it has `CREATE_DELETE_VOLUME_GROUP_SNAPSHOT` controller capability.
This RPC will be called by the CO to create a new volume group snapshot from a list of source volumes on behalf of a user.

> The purpose of this call is to request the creation of a multi-volume snapshot. Group snapshots can be created from the existing list of volumes. Note that calls to this function MUST be idempotent - the function may be called multiple times for the same name - the group snapshot must only be created once.

Reviewer 7: Similar to CreateSnapshot, do you want to add some more detail here about when to set `ready_to_use`, and how the snapshots would get used in CreateVolume?

In VolumeGroupSnapshot message, snapshots is an optional field while group_snapshot_id is a required field.

```protobuf
message CreateVolumeGroupSnapshotRequest {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

>   // suggested name for a group snapshot (required for idempotent)

Reviewer 7: Include the same level of detail that `CreateSnapshotRequest.name` has.

  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string name = 1;

  // volume ids of the volumes to be snapshotted together.
  // This field is REQUIRED.

>   repeated string volume_ids = 2;

Reviewer 7: In `CreateSnapshotRequest`, this is called `source_volume_id`. Do we want to be consistent here?

  // Secrets required by plugin to complete volume group snapshot
  // creation request.
  // This field is OPTIONAL. Refer to the `Secrets Requirements`
  // section on how to use this field.
  map<string, string> secrets = 3 [(.csi.v1.csi_secret) = true];

  // Plugin specific parameters passed in as opaque key-value pairs.
  // This field is OPTIONAL. The Plugin is responsible for parsing and
  // validating these parameters. COs will treat these as opaque.
  map<string, string> parameters = 4;
}

message CreateVolumeGroupSnapshotResponse {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // Contains all attributes of the newly created group snapshot.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  VolumeGroupSnapshot group_snapshot = 1;
}

message VolumeGroupSnapshot {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

>   // The identifier for this group snapshot, generated by the plugin.

Reviewer 7: Add same level of detail as `CreateSnapshotResponse`

  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string group_snapshot_id = 1;

  // A list of snapshots created. Snapshot is the same

>   // definition as Snapshot definition used in CSI.

Reviewer 7: Is this clarification necessary since we can only have one type of that name defined in the spec?

>   // This field is OPTIONAL.

Reviewer 7: What happens if the SP does not provide anything?

Author: See discussions here: See discussions here: https://github.com/container-storage-interface/spec/pull/519/files#r1069703909

| Not enough space to create group snapshot | 13 RESOURCE_EXHAUSTED | There is not enough space on the storage system to handle the create group snapshot request. | Caller SHOULD fail this request. Future calls to CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot MAY succeed if space is freed up. |

#### `DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshot`

**ALPHA FEATURE**

A Controller Plugin MUST implement this RPC call if it has `CREATE_DELETE_VOLUME_GROUP_SNAPSHOT` capability.
This RPC will be called by the CO to delete a volume group snapshot.

This operation MUST be idempotent.
If a group snapshot corresponding to the specified `group_snapshot_id` does not exist or the artifacts associated with the group snapshot do not exist anymore, the Plugin MUST reply `0 OK`.

```protobuf
message DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshotRequest {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // The ID of the group snapshot to be deleted.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string group_snapshot_id = 1;

  // A list of snapshot ids that are part of this group snapshot.
  // This field is OPTIONAL.

>   repeated string snapshot_ids = 2;

Author: This will be passed to the driver. If driver does not maintain a list of snapshot ids, this will help them find individual snapshots to delete.

  // Intentionally empty.
}
```

##### DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshot Errors

If the plugin is unable to complete the DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshot call successfully, it MUST return a non-ok gRPC code in the gRPC status.
If the conditions defined below are encountered, the plugin MUST return the specified gRPC error code.
The CO MUST implement the specified error recovery behavior when it encounters the gRPC error code.

| Condition | gRPC Code | Description | Recovery Behavior |
|-----------|-----------|-------------|-------------------|
| Volume group snapshot in use | 9 FAILED_PRECONDITION | Indicates that the volume group snapshot corresponding to the specified `group_snapshot_id` could not be deleted because it is in use by another resource. | Caller SHOULD ensure that there are no other resources using the volume group snapshot, and then retry with exponential back off. |

#### `ControllerGetVolumeGroupSnapshot`

**ALPHA FEATURE**

This optional RPC MAY be called by the CO to fetch current information about a volume group snapshot.

A Controller Plugin MUST implement this `ControllerGetVolumeGroupSnapshot` RPC call if it has `GET_VOLUME_GROUP_SNAPSHOT` capability.

> `ControllerGetVolumeGroupSnapshotResponse` should contain current information of a volume group snapshot if it exists.

Reviewer 7: The `ListSnapshots` description had some detail about returning snapshots if it hasn't been cut yet. Do we want to have similar detail here?

Author: Added a line like this:
```
`ControllerGetVolumeGroupSnapshot` SHALL NOT show a group snapshot that is being created but has not been created successfully yet.
```

```protobuf
message ListVolumeGroupSnapshotsRequest {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // If specified (non-zero value), the Plugin MUST NOT return more
  // entries than this number in the response. If the actual number of
  // entries is more than this number, the Plugin MUST set `next_token`
  // in the response which can be used to get the next page of entries
  // in the subsequent `ListVolumeGroupSnapshots` call.
  // This field is OPTIONAL. If not specified (zero value), it means
  // there is no restriction on the number of entries that can be
  // returned. The value of this field MUST NOT be negative.
  int32 max_entries = 1;

  // A token to specify where to start paginating. Set this field to
  // `next_token` returned by a previous `ListVolumeGroupSnapshots`
  // call to get the next page of entries. This field is OPTIONAL.
  // An empty string is equal to an unspecified field value.
  string starting_token = 2;

  // Identity information for the source volume group.
  // This field is OPTIONAL.
  // It can be used to list group snapshots by volume group.

>   string source_volume_group_id = 3;

Author: Will drop this.

| Volume in use | 9 FAILED_PRECONDITION | Indicates that the volume corresponding to the specified `volume_id` could not be expanded because it is node-published or node-staged and the underlying filesystem does not support expansion of published or staged volumes. | Caller MUST NOT retry. |
| Unsupported capacity_range | 11 OUT_OF_RANGE | Indicates that the capacity range is not allowed by the Plugin. More human-readable information MAY be provided in the gRPC `status.message` field. | Caller MUST fix the capacity range before retrying. |

### Group Controller Service RPCs

#### `GroupControllerGetCapabilities`

> A GroupController Plugin MUST implement this RPC call. This RPC allows the CO to check the supported capabilities of group controller service provided by the Plugin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Plugin that implements GroupController MUST implement this RPC call. This RPC allows the CO to check the supported capabilities of group controller service provided by the Plugin.
```

Author: Done

```protobuf
message GroupControllerGetCapabilitiesRequest {
  // Intentionally empty.
}

message GroupControllerGetCapabilitiesResponse {
  // All the capabilities that the group controller service supports.
  // This field is OPTIONAL.
  repeated GroupControllerServiceCapability capabilities = 1;
}

// Specifies a capability of the group controller service.
message GroupControllerServiceCapability {
  message RPC {
    enum Type {
      UNKNOWN = 0;

      // Indicates that the group controller plugin supports
      // creating, deleting, and getting details of a volume
      // group snapshot.
      CREATE_DELETE_GET_VOLUME_GROUP_SNAPSHOT = 1
      [(alpha_enum_value) = true];
    }

    Type type = 1;
  }

  oneof type {
    // RPC that the controller supports.
    RPC rpc = 1;
  }
}
```

##### GroupControllerGetCapabilities Errors

If the plugin is unable to complete the GroupControllerGetCapabilities call successfully, it MUST return a non-ok gRPC code in the gRPC status.

#### `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot`

**ALPHA FEATURE**

A Group Controller Plugin MUST implement this RPC call if it has `CREATE_DELETE_GET_VOLUME_GROUP_SNAPSHOT` controller capability.

> This RPC will be called by the CO to create a new volume group snapshot from a list of source volumes on behalf of a user.

Reviewer 2: Should we add a consistency requirement (or recommendation) for created snapshots?

Author: Added this: This group snapshot SHOULD be crash consistent.

Reviewer 5: That wording is still a big vague. Sorry I overlooked this part of the spec during my review, but it IS a very important aspect of this spec to explain why a group snapshot is not functionally identical to a bunch of snapshots taken close to the same time.

I propose this wording:

The purpose of this call is to request the creation of a multi-volume (group) snapshot. This group snapshot MUST give a write-order consistency guarantee or fail if that's not possible. That is to say, all the of the volume snapshots in the group must be taken at the same point in time relative to a stream of write traffic to the specified volumes. Note that calls to this function MUST be idempotent - the function may be called multiple times for the same name - the group snapshot must only be created once.

I think that we have to use MUST rather than SHOULD with the consistency guarantee to rule out implementations that can't offer the needed guarantee -- otherwise we poison this feature for end users who actually want to depend on the guarantee. SHOULD leaves room that the guarantee is not met and will harm adoption.

If an error occurs before a group snapshot is cut, `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot` SHOULD return a corresponding gRPC error code that reflects the error condition.

For plugins that support snapshot post processing such as uploading, CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot SHOULD return 0 OK and the ready_to_use field SHOULD be set to false after the group snapshot is cut but still being processed. The CO SHOULD issue the CreateVolumeGroupSnapshotRequest RPC with the same arguments again periodically until the ready_to_use field has a value of true indicating all the snapshots have been "processed" and are ready to use to create new volumes. If an error occurs during the process for any individual snapshot, CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot SHOULD return a corresponding gRPC error code that reflects the error condition. The ready_to_use field for each individual snapshot SHOULD have a value of false until the snapshot has been "processed" and is ready to use to create new volumes.

> An individual snapshot MAY be used as the source to provision a new volume.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After snapshot creation, any individual snapshot from the group MAY be used as a source to provision a new volume.
```

Author: Done

In VolumeGroupSnapshot message, both snapshots and group_snapshot_id are required fields.

> If an error occurs before all the individual snapshots are created when creating a group snapshot of multiple volumes and a group_snapshot_id is not yet available for CO to do clean up, SP SHOULD do clean up and make sure no snapshots are leaked.

Reviewer: If create-volume-group-snapshot (CVGS) fails after some subset of snapshots was created w/ some subset failing (because some post-processing op failed), then a subsequent CVGS RPC is expected to report the error... as long as the SP hasn't already cleaned up after the failed CVGS op, right?

Because if the SP is doing cleanup, and the cleanup happens very quickly then subsequent CVGS could kick off a secondary operation (that may or may not fail) like the first. This *could* happen in such a manner that the CO never actually observes the failure gRPC because the SP is so quick to clean up between CO invocations of (an async-failing) CVGS. It's entirely possible that in such cases, the CO could reissue CVGS calls indefinitely w/ the same parameter set, not knowing that it will never be completed by the SP because the SP is mopping things up so quickly - all the CO might see is that ready_to_use never becomes true.

Are there holes in the spec like this elsewhere, where the SP can perform GC in a manner that leaves the CO blind to underlying errors? In general, we've shied away from async operations in CSI. Designing w/ post-processing steps that complete out-of-band effectively makes the API async. Can we avoid that?

IMO this needs more thought: the CO should be able to observe a failure and report it back to either some controller, or admin. Which likely means that magical auto-cleanup for failed CVGS (and maybe even for single create-snapshot) ops, performed by the SP, should go away.

Thoughts?

Author: > If create-volume-group-snapshot (CVGS) fails after some subset of snapshots was created w/ some subset failing (because some post-processing op failed), then a subsequent CVGS RPC is expected to report the error... as long as the SP hasn't already cleaned up after the failed CVGS op, right?

create-volume-group-snapshot (CVGS) will not return success with a group_snapshot_id before all the snapshots are cut. Post-processing happens after this point. This sentence "SP SHOULD do clean up and make sure no snapshots are leaked" refers to the situation before all the snapshots are cut successfully.  So "If create-volume-group-snapshot (CVGS) fails after some subset of snapshots was created w/ some subset failing (because some post-processing op failed)", a gRPC error code will be returned back to CO at this point.  It does not rely on a subsequent call to report error.  The create operation is synchronous until those IDs are returned.  Yes, post-processing is async, but CO should clean up those resources when post-processing starts because it has got those IDs and CO does not need to rely on SP for the cleanups.  I'll clarify this in the spec that "SP clean up" refers to before post-processing starts.

> IMO this needs more thought: the CO should be able to observe a failure and report it back to either some controller, or admin. Which likely means that magical auto-cleanup for failed CVGS (and maybe even for single create-snapshot) ops, performed by the SP, should go away.

Cleanup by SP is needed if an error occurs before a CO can get group_snapshot_id and snapshot_ids. Without those IDs, CO does not have a way to clean up even if it observes a failure.  @bswartz did suggest to have a new delete API that takes in all the parameters from a create operation during our discussions.  This applies to not just CreateSnapshot and CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot, but also CreateVolume.

Reviewer 5: I'll put an agenda item on tomorrow's monthly meeting to discuss this issue. It's a wider class of problems that affects failed creates for all CSI objects: volumes and snapshots included.

Reviewer 5: When Xing and I discussed this, the idea was that the SP would only clean up when reporting a terminal error. Non-terminal errors would not trigger a clean up, and cleanup would never occur until after an error has been reported to the CO.

At the time I was able to convince myself that this guarantee was "good enough" to stay out of trouble, and follows the existing pattern of CSI.

Author: I updated the comments to this:
```
If an error occurs before all the individual snapshots are cut when creating a group snapshot of multiple volumes and a group_snapshot_id is not yet available for CO to do clean up, SP MUST return an error, and SP SHOULD also do clean up and make sure no snapshots are leaked.
```

Author: @jdef We discussed this in today's CSI Community Sync and decided not to introduce a name parameter in the Delete operation.  Can you please review the updated PR and see if it looks good?

#### `DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshot`

**ALPHA FEATURE**

A Controller Plugin MUST implement this RPC call if it has `CREATE_DELETE_GET_VOLUME_GROUP_SNAPSHOT` capability.
This RPC will be called by the CO to delete a volume group snapshot.
This operation will delete a volume group snapshot as well as all individual snapshots that are part of this volume group snapshot.

This operation MUST be idempotent.
If a group snapshot corresponding to the specified `group_snapshot_id` does not exist or the artifacts associated with the group snapshot do not exist anymore, the Plugin MUST reply `0 OK`.

```protobuf
message DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshotRequest {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // The ID of the group snapshot to be deleted.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string group_snapshot_id = 1;

  // A list of snapshot IDs that are part of this group snapshot.
  // Some SPs require this list to delete the snapshots in the group.
  // This field is REQUIRED.

>   repeated string snapshot_ids = 2;

Reviewer 2: nit: Should SP validate that `snapshot_ids` matches `group_snapshot_id`? If so, what should it do if there is a mismatch or partial match? If not, should we tell CO it won't be validated?

Reviewer 5: I requested that the list of snapshot IDs is provided here specifically for the benefit of stateless SPs which don't have the information.

One can imagine some SPs which use the group ID to perform the delete, and ignore the list of snapshot IDs.
One can imagine some SPs which use the list of snapshot IDs to perform the delete, and ignore the group ID.
One can also imagine an SP that uses both and has the ability to validate them to notice mismatches.

I think we want to leave all 3 of these implementation options open.

Author: Updated the comments to this:
  // If SP does not need to rely on this field to delete the snapshots
  // in the group, this field MAY be ignored.
  // Some SPs require this list to delete the snapshots in the group.
  // If SP needs to use this field to delete the snapshots in the
  // group, it MAY report an error when there is a mismatch.

  // Intentionally empty.
}
```

##### DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshot Errors

If the plugin is unable to complete the DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshot call successfully, it MUST return a non-ok gRPC code in the gRPC status.
If the conditions defined below are encountered, the plugin MUST return the specified gRPC error code.
The CO MUST implement the specified error recovery behavior when it encounters the gRPC error code.

| Condition | gRPC Code | Description | Recovery Behavior |
|-----------|-----------|-------------|-------------------|
| Volume group snapshot in use | 9 FAILED_PRECONDITION | Indicates that the volume group snapshot corresponding to the specified `group_snapshot_id` could not be deleted because it is in use by another resource. | Caller SHOULD ensure that there are no other resources using the volume group snapshot, and then retry with exponential back off. |

#### `GetVolumeGroupSnapshot`

**ALPHA FEATURE**

This optional RPC MAY be called by the CO to fetch current information about a volume group snapshot.

A Controller Plugin MUST implement this `GetVolumeGroupSnapshot` RPC call if it has `CREATE_DELETE_GET_VOLUME_GROUP_SNAPSHOT` capability.

> `GetVolumeGroupSnapshot` SHALL NOT show a group snapshot that is being created but has not been created successfully yet.

Reviewer: Should this be more explicit? i.e. that snapshots are not visible via this RPC until their ready_to_use state reflects "true" via the CVGS response?

Reviewer 5: I think that's too restrictive. Part of the value of a Get RPC is to see the snapshots that exist and are not ready_to_use yet. The specific cutoff is probably that you don't want to expose snapshots which aren't cut yet. This is hard to express however, because you can't get the ID until the snapshot is cut, and you can't call Get without an ID. Maybe we should remove this line entirely, because I don't think it actually communicates any useful information to an SP writer, and I don't think it protects against any actual problem situations.

Author: Ok, I removed this line to avoid confusion.

  // group_snapshot_id across multiple SPs.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string group_snapshot_id = 1;

  // A list of snapshots created.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  repeated Snapshot snapshots = 2;

  // Timestamp when the volume group snapshot is taken.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  .google.protobuf.Timestamp creation_time = 3;
}
```

##### CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot Errors

If the plugin is unable to complete the CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot call successfully, it MUST return a non-ok gRPC code in the gRPC status.
If the conditions defined below are encountered, the plugin MUST return the specified gRPC error code.
The CO MUST implement the specified error recovery behavior when it encounters the gRPC error code.

| Condition | gRPC Code | Description | Recovery Behavior |
|-----------|-----------|-------------|-------------------|
| Group snapshot already exists but is incompatible | 6 ALREADY_EXISTS | Indicates that a group snapshot corresponding to the specified group snapshot `name` already exists but is incompatible with the specified `volume_id`. | Caller MUST fix the arguments or use a different `name` before retrying. |

> | Not enough space to create group snapshot | 13 RESOURCE_EXHAUSTED | There is not enough space on the storage system to handle the create group snapshot request. | Caller SHOULD fail this request. Future calls to CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot MAY succeed if space is freed up. |

Reviewer 8: Should we have a FAILED_PRECONDITION error if multiple volumes are specified that CANNOT be snapshot together? Some SP may have volumes spread across different storage backends, availability zones, etc preventing this. Some SP also have requirements that for write-order consistent snapshots, the volumes would have to be set up to have that capability ahead of time.

Author: Yes, that's reasonable.

Author: Added: https://github.com/container-storage-interface/spec/pull/519/commits/b3e48c6e38be7c1aeea5149f5b75b8e3dd23a6d9

If the plugin is unable to complete the GroupControllerGetCapabilities call successfully, it MUST return a non-ok gRPC code in the gRPC status.

#### `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot`

**ALPHA FEATURE**

A Group Controller Plugin MUST implement this RPC call if it has `CREATE_DELETE_GET_VOLUME_GROUP_SNAPSHOT` controller capability.
This RPC will be called by the CO to create a new volume group snapshot from a list of source volumes on behalf of a user.

The purpose of this call is to request the creation of a multi-volume snapshot. Group snapshots can be created from the existing list of volumes. Note that calls to this function MUST be idempotent - the function may be called multiple times for the same name - the group snapshot must only be created once.

If a group snapshot corresponding to the specified group snapshot `name` is successfully created (meaning all snapshots associated with the group are successfully cut), the Plugin MUST reply `0 OK` with the corresponding `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshotResponse`.

If an error occurs before a group snapshot is cut, `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot` SHOULD return a corresponding gRPC error code that reflects the error condition.

> `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot` SHOULD return `0 OK` after all the snapshots are cut regardless of whether post processing such as uploading is complete or not.

Author: We had a lengthy discussion regarding this: https://github.com/container-storage-interface/spec/pull/519#discussion_r1068918404

Yes, post-processing could fail. We have decided to drop the `ready_to_use` field from VolumeGroupSnapshot message in CSI spec after the above discussions. CO will check `ready_to_use` field of each individual snapshot.  Only after `ready_to_use` becomes true for all snapshots, CO will treat the group snapshot as ready_to_use.  In K8s VolumeGroupSnapshot API object, there will be a readyToUse field so a user can check that and know whether post-processing is complete for the entire group snapshot.

> `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot` SHOULD return `0 OK` after all the snapshots are cut regardless of whether post processing such as uploading is complete or not.

Reviewer: I read the lengthy discussion (thanks), my question remains: if (optional) post-processing fails w/ an error code/message, how/where is that relayed to the user? i suppose this question applies to snapshots in general, not just group snapshots.

> `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot` SHOULD return `0 OK` after all the snapshots are cut regardless of whether post processing such as uploading is complete or not.

Author: For individual snapshot, we have detailed description in CSI spec:

https://github.com/container-storage-interface/spec/blob/master/spec.md#createsnapshot
```
For plugins that supports snapshot post processing such as uploading, CreateSnapshot SHOULD return 0 OK and ready_to_use SHOULD be set to false after the snapshot is cut but still being processed. CO SHOULD then reissue the same CreateSnapshotRequest periodically until boolean ready_to_use flips to true indicating the snapshot has been "processed" and is ready to use to create new volumes. If an error occurs during the process, CreateSnapshot SHOULD return a corresponding gRPC error code that reflects the error condition.
```

> `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot` SHOULD return `0 OK` after all the snapshots are cut regardless of whether post processing such as uploading is complete or not.

Author: For group snapshot, if an error occurs during the post-processing, CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot SHOULD also return a corresponding gRPC error code that reflects the error condition.  I'll add this.

> `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot` SHOULD return `0 OK` after all the snapshots are cut regardless of whether post processing such as uploading is complete or not.

Author: I'm thinking maybe we still need to have ready_to_use in VolumeGroupSnapshot.

Without ready_to_use in VolumeGroupSnapshot, the steps are as follows:
- CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot returns 0 after group snapshot is cut
- Post-processing ......
- CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot returns error code if post-processing from any one snapshot fails

CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot already finished successfully in step one, but then it failed.
We can't get error code from individual snapshot because CreateSnapshot is not called here. The only thing we can get from Snapshot message is the ready_to_use boolean field.

With ready_to_use in VolumeGroupSnapshot, the steps are as follows:
- CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot returns 0 and ready_to_use to false after group snapshot is cut
- Post-processing ......
- CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot returns error code and ready_to_use is still false if post-processing fails

> `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot` SHOULD return `0 OK` after all the snapshots are cut regardless of whether post processing such as uploading is complete or not.

Reviewer 5: My thinking is that the CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot RPC's only job is to get the individual snapshots cut and return their IDs. At this point the CO is able to populate the snapshotHandle field of all the needed VSC objects and watch them for ready_to_use. Any errors past that point are going to be related to individual snapshots, and if the CO wants to handle those errors by cleaning up and trying again, it's going to have to call the DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshot API with the appropriate IDs regaradless of what changes we make to the create API. But that's up to the CO -- it could also choose to leave the partial group snapshot there and only use the successful subset and that's technically valid. The use case could be that snapshots are taken frequently enough that failures are ignored and old snapshots are simply reaped on a schedule.

Post-processing _of the group snapshot itself_ is only relevant when there is an API to clone the whole group snapshot to a new volume group, and I still feel like it can be added in the future as part of that feature (if we decide to go that route).

> `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot` SHOULD return `0 OK` after all the snapshots are cut regardless of whether post processing such as uploading is complete or not.

Author: I think we still need the wording there to provide guidance to CO.  In K8s VolumeGroupSnapshot API object, we still have readyToUse field so that an user can take a look of that one field and know whether the whole thing is complete or not.

> `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot` SHOULD return `0 OK` after all the snapshots are cut regardless of whether post processing such as uploading is complete or not.

Reviewer 5: We could consider removing the field there too. If we don't, we just have the modify the behavior of the sidecar to set that field based on the logical AND of all the member snapshots' readyToUse fields.

The point is that we should define the CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot RPC to have the very simple job of creating a list of snapshots with the special guarantee that they were cut at the same time, and nothing else. This minimal guarantee allows many underlying implementations to all work well behind this interface.

> `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot` SHOULD return `0 OK` after all the snapshots are cut regardless of whether post processing such as uploading is complete or not.

Author: Chatted with @bswartz about this.  Added ready_to_use back to VolumeGroupSnapshot so that the behavior of CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot is consistent with CreateSnapshot.
https://github.com/container-storage-interface/spec/pull/519/commits/11d9ad36d464ebab9ef161134ec5096fb8ce1077

CO SHOULD check the `ready_to_use` boolean of individual snapshots that are members of the group snapshot and only treat the group snapshot as ready to use when all snapshots have been "processed" and is ready to use to create new volumes from those snapshots.

An individual snapshot MAY be used as the source to provision a new volume.

In VolumeGroupSnapshot message, both snapshots and group_snapshot_id are required fields.

If an error occurs before all the individual snapshots are created when creating a group snapshot of multiple volumes and a group_snapshot_id is not yet available for CO to do clean up, SP SHOULD do clean up and make sure no snapshots are leaked.

```protobuf
message CreateVolumeGroupSnapshotRequest {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // The suggested name for the group snapshot. This field is REQUIRED
  // for idempotency.
  // Any Unicode string that conforms to the length limit is allowed
  // except those containing the following banned characters:
  // U+0000-U+0008, U+000B, U+000C, U+000E-U+001F, U+007F-U+009F.
  // (These are control characters other than commonly used whitespace.)
  string name = 1;

>   // volume ids of the source volumes to be snapshotted together.

Reviewer: nit: here (and elsewhere in the spec, particularly snapshot docs) acronyms should be properly capitalized - "IDs" (instead of "ids") in this case, please. There's another snapshot doc comment w/ a similar problem - please fix that too :)

Author: Done

  // This field is REQUIRED.
  repeated string source_volume_ids = 2;

  // Secrets required by plugin to complete
  // ControllerCreateVolumeGroupSnapshot request.
  // This field is OPTIONAL. Refer to the `Secrets Requirements`
  // section on how to use this field.
  // The secrets provided in this field SHOULD be the same as
  // the secrets provided in ControllerDeleteVolumeGroupSnapshot
  // and ControllerGetVolumeGroupSnapshot requests for the same

>   // group snapshot unless if secrets are rotated after the

Reviewer: re: secret rotation - why is special language used for the snapshot APIs vs. elsewhere? IMO we should be consistent w/ respect to how we describe expectations around secret longevity. otherwise this looks like a special case (and I do not believe that is the intent here)

Author: Lines 2870-2873 are added to address a review comment, mainly to make it clear that the secrets for the same VolumeGroup should be the same for all operations. If you are fine with that part, maybe we can use similar language for other secrets throughout the doc in a separate PR.  I can drop the secrets rotation part if it adds confusion.

Reviewer 5: Yeah we should be consistent about recommendations for secret longevity, but it doesn't make sense to do all that work in this PR.

Author: Changed to this:
```
// The secrets provided in this field SHOULD be the same for
// all group snapshot operations on the same group snapshot.
```

  // group snapshot is created.
  map<string, string> secrets = 3 [(csi_secret) = true];

  // Volume secrets required by plugin to complete volume group
  // snapshot creation request. This field is needed in case the
  // volume level secrets are different from the above secrets
  // for the group snapshot.
  // This field is OPTIONAL.

>   repeated VolumeSecret volume_secrets = 4;

Reviewer: are there SPs that actually need this for group snapshotting? if not can we table this for later? we have secrets APIs bleeding all over the spec, and if no system needs this right now then why add it?

Author: I don't have a concrete example of a SP needing this.  @humblec told me Ceph does not need this as Secrets and VolumeSecrets will be the same.  This is added just in case some SP might need this to support per-volume secrets.

@bswartz Are you okay if we drop this field for now?

Author: Checked with @ameade from NetApp and @ggriffiths from Portworx.  They don't need VolumeSecrets for the group snapshots.  So dropping it for now.

  // Plugin specific parameters passed in as opaque key-value pairs.
  // This field is OPTIONAL. The Plugin is responsible for parsing and
  // validating these parameters. COs will treat these as opaque.
  map<string, string> parameters = 5;
}

> message VolumeSecret {

Reviewer: should this be an "alpha" message?

Author: Dropped this field for now.

  // ID of the volume whose secrets are provided.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string volume_id = 1;

  // Secrets required by plugin for a volume operation.
  // This field is REQUIRED. Refer to the `Secrets Requirements`
  // section on how to use this field.
  map<string, string> secrets = 2 [(.csi.v1.csi_secret) = true];
}

message CreateVolumeGroupSnapshotResponse {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // Contains all attributes of the newly created group snapshot.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  VolumeGroupSnapshot group_snapshot = 1;
}

message VolumeGroupSnapshot {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // The identifier for this group snapshot, generated by the plugin.
  // This field MUST contain enough information to uniquely identify
  // this specific snapshot vs all other group snapshots supported by
  // this plugin.
  // This field SHALL be used by the CO in subsequent calls to refer to
  // this group snapshot.
  // The SP is NOT responsible for global uniqueness of
  // group_snapshot_id across multiple SPs.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string group_snapshot_id = 1;

>   // A list of snapshots created.

Reviewer: suggestion: "A list of snapshots belonging to this group."

Author: Done

  // This field is REQUIRED.
  repeated Snapshot snapshots = 2;

>   // Timestamp when the volume group snapshot is taken.

Reviewer: suggestion: ".. of when the volume group snapshot was taken."

Author: Done

| Not enough space to create group snapshot | 13 RESOURCE_EXHAUSTED | There is not enough space on the storage system to handle the create group snapshot request. | Caller SHOULD fail this request. Future calls to CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot MAY succeed if space is freed up. |

#### `DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshot`

**ALPHA FEATURE**

A Controller Plugin MUST implement this RPC call if it has `CREATE_DELETE_GET_VOLUME_GROUP_SNAPSHOT` capability.
This RPC will be called by the CO to delete a volume group snapshot.
This operation will delete a volume group snapshot as well as all individual snapshots that are part of this volume group snapshot.

This operation MUST be idempotent.
If a group snapshot corresponding to the specified `group_snapshot_id` does not exist or the artifacts associated with the group snapshot do not exist anymore, the Plugin MUST reply `0 OK`.

```protobuf
message DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshotRequest {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // The ID of the group snapshot to be deleted.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string group_snapshot_id = 1;

>   // A list of snapshot ids that are part of this group snapshot.

Reviewer: nit: "ids" vs "IDs"

Author: Done.

  // Some SPs require this list to delete the snapshots in the group.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  repeated string snapshot_ids = 2;

  // Secrets required by plugin to complete group snapshot deletion
  // request.
  // This field is OPTIONAL. Refer to the `Secrets Requirements`
  // section on how to use this field.
  // The secrets provided in this field SHOULD be the same as

>   // the secrets provided in ControllerCreateVolumeGroupSnapshot

Reviewer: you mean `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshotRequest` ?

Author: Changed to the following:
```
  // The secrets provided in this field SHOULD be the same for
  // all group snapshot operations on the same group snapshot.
```

The CO MUST implement the specified error recovery behavior when it encounters the gRPC error code.

| Condition | gRPC Code | Description | Recovery Behavior |
|-----------|-----------|-------------|-------------------|
| Group snapshot already exists but is incompatible | 6 ALREADY_EXISTS | Indicates that a group snapshot corresponding to the specified group snapshot `name` already exists but is incompatible with the specified `volume_id`. | Caller MUST fix the arguments or use a different `name` before retrying. |
| Cannot snapshot multiple volumes together | 9 FAILED_PRECONDITION | Indicates that the specified volumes cannot be snapshotted together because the volumes are not configured properly based on requirements from the SP. | Caller MUST fix the configuration of the volumes so that they meet the requirements for group snapshotting before retrying. |
| Not enough space to create group snapshot | 13 RESOURCE_EXHAUSTED | There is not enough space on the storage system to handle the create group snapshot request. | Caller SHOULD fail this request. Future calls to CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot MAY succeed if space is freed up. |

> #### `DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshot`

Reviewer 2: What will trigger DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshot on the k8s side?

Author: User deletes the VolumeGroupSnapshot K8s API object in K8s will trigger DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshot CSI RPC call.

```protobuf
message DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshotRequest {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // The ID of the group snapshot to be deleted.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string group_snapshot_id = 1;

  // A list of snapshot IDs that are part of this group snapshot.
  // If SP does not need to rely on this field to delete the snapshots
  // in the group, it SHOULD check this field and report an error
  // if it has the ability to detect a mismatch.
  // Some SPs require this list to delete the snapshots in the group.
  // If SP needs to use this field to delete the snapshots in the
  // group, it MUST report an error if it has the ability to detect
  // a mismatch.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  repeated string snapshot_ids = 2;

  // Secrets required by plugin to complete group snapshot deletion
  // request.
  // This field is OPTIONAL. Refer to the `Secrets Requirements`
  // section on how to use this field.
  // The secrets provided in this field SHOULD be the same for
  // all group snapshot operations on the same group snapshot.
  map<string, string> secrets = 3 [(csi_secret) = true];
}

message DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshotResponse {

>   // Intentionally empty.

Reviewer: ```
option (alpha_message) = true;
```
?

Author: Good catch. Added.

| Volume in use | 9 FAILED_PRECONDITION | Indicates that the volume corresponding to the specified `volume_id` could not be expanded because it is node-published or node-staged and the underlying filesystem does not support expansion of published or staged volumes. | Caller MUST NOT retry. |
| Unsupported capacity_range | 11 OUT_OF_RANGE | Indicates that the capacity range is not allowed by the Plugin. More human-readable information MAY be provided in the gRPC `status.message` field. | Caller MUST fix the capacity range before retrying. |

### Group Controller Service RPCs

#### `GroupControllerGetCapabilities`

> A Plugin that implements GroupController MUST implement this RPC call. This RPC allows the CO to check the supported capabilities of group controller service provided by the Plugin.

Reviewer: nit: one complete sentence per line

  // All the capabilities that the group controller service supports.
  // This field is OPTIONAL.
  repeated GroupControllerServiceCapability capabilities = 1;
}

// Specifies a capability of the group controller service.
message GroupControllerServiceCapability {
  message RPC {
    enum Type {
      UNKNOWN = 0;

      // Indicates that the group controller plugin supports
      // creating, deleting, and getting details of a volume
      // group snapshot.
      CREATE_DELETE_GET_VOLUME_GROUP_SNAPSHOT = 1
      [(alpha_enum_value) = true];
    }

    Type type = 1;
  }

  oneof type {
    // RPC that the controller supports.
    RPC rpc = 1;
  }
}
```

##### GroupControllerGetCapabilities Errors

If the plugin is unable to complete the GroupControllerGetCapabilities call successfully, it MUST return a non-ok gRPC code in the gRPC status.

#### `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot`

**ALPHA FEATURE**

A Group Controller Plugin MUST implement this RPC call if it has `CREATE_DELETE_GET_VOLUME_GROUP_SNAPSHOT` controller capability.
This RPC will be called by the CO to create a new volume group snapshot from a list of source volumes on behalf of a user.

> The purpose of this call is to request the creation of a multi-volume group snapshot. This group snapshot MUST give a write-order consistency guarantee or fail if that's not possible. That is to say, all the of the volume snapshots in the group MUST be taken at the same point-in-time relative to a stream of write traffic to the specified volumes. Note that calls to this function MUST be idempotent - the function may be called multiple times for the same name, with the same `source_volume_ids` and `parameters` - the group snapshot MUST only be created once.

Reviewer: nit: one complete sentence per line

> If a group snapshot corresponding to the specified group snapshot `name`, `source_volume_ids', and `parameters` is successfully created (meaning all snapshots associated with the group are successfully cut), the Plugin MUST reply `0 OK` with the corresponding `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshotResponse`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a group snapshot corresponding to the specified group snapshot `name`, `source_volume_ids`, and `parameters` is successfully created (meaning all snapshots associated with the group are successfully cut), the Plugin MUST reply `0 OK` with the corresponding `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshotResponse`.
```

If an error occurs before a group snapshot is cut, `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot` SHOULD return a corresponding gRPC error code that reflects the error condition.

> For plugins that support snapshot post processing such as uploading, CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot SHOULD return 0 OK and the ready_to_use field SHOULD be set to false after the group snapshot is cut but still being processed. The CO SHOULD issue the CreateVolumeGroupSnapshotRequest RPC with the same arguments again periodically until the ready_to_use field has a value of true indicating all the snapshots have been "processed" and are ready to use to create new volumes. If an error occurs during the process for any individual snapshot, CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot SHOULD return a corresponding gRPC error code that reflects the error condition. The ready_to_use field for each individual snapshot SHOULD have a value of false until the snapshot has been "processed" and is ready to use to create new volumes.

Reviewer: nit: one complete sentence per line

After snapshot creation, any individual snapshot from the group MAY be used as a source to provision a new volume.

> In VolumeGroupSnapshot message, both snapshots and group_snapshot_id are required fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the VolumeGroupSnapshot message, both snapshots and group_snapshot_id are required fields.
```

  // This field is OPTIONAL. The Plugin is responsible for parsing and
  // validating these parameters. COs will treat these as opaque.
  map<string, string> parameters = 4;
}

message CreateVolumeGroupSnapshotResponse {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // Contains all attributes of the newly created group snapshot.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  VolumeGroupSnapshot group_snapshot = 1;
}

message VolumeGroupSnapshot {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // The identifier for this group snapshot, generated by the plugin.
  // This field MUST contain enough information to uniquely identify
  // this specific snapshot vs all other group snapshots supported by
  // this plugin.
  // This field SHALL be used by the CO in subsequent calls to refer to
  // this group snapshot.
  // The SP is NOT responsible for global uniqueness of
  // group_snapshot_id across multiple SPs.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string group_snapshot_id = 1;

  // A list of snapshots belonging to this group.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  repeated Snapshot snapshots = 2;

  // Timestamp of when the volume group snapshot was taken.
  // This field is REQUIRED.

>   .google.protobuf.Timestamp creation_time = 3;

Reviewer: is this `creation_time` field actually required - if so, why? each of the `snapshots` already has a `creation_time` field.

related, is the `creation_time` field of each of the contained `snapshots` required to be the same? wondering about semantics here and what guarantees, if any, the spec should outline. e.g. if they are allowed to be different, is that significant for any reason?

  // Indicates if all individual snapshots in the group snapshot
  // are ready to use as a `volume_content_source` in a
  // `CreateVolumeRequest`. The default value is false.
  // If any snapshot in the list of snapshots in this message have
  // ready_to_use set to false, the SP MUST set this field to false.
  // If all of the snapshots in the list of snapshots in this message
  // have ready_to_use set to true, the SP SHOULD set this field to
  // true.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  bool ready_to_use = 4;
}
```

##### CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot Errors

If the plugin is unable to complete the CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot call successfully, it MUST return a non-ok gRPC code in the gRPC status.
If the conditions defined below are encountered, the plugin MUST return the specified gRPC error code.
The CO MUST implement the specified error recovery behavior when it encounters the gRPC error code.

| Condition | gRPC Code | Description | Recovery Behavior |
|-----------|-----------|-------------|-------------------|

> | Group snapshot already exists but is incompatible | 6 ALREADY_EXISTS | Indicates that a group snapshot corresponding to the specified group snapshot `name` already exists but is incompatible with the specified `volume_id`. | Caller MUST fix the arguments or use a different `name` before retrying. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Group snapshot already exists but is incompatible | 6 ALREADY_EXISTS | Indicates that a group snapshot corresponding to the specified group snapshot `name` already exists but is incompatible with the specified `source_volume_ids` or `parameters`. | Caller MUST fix the arguments or use a different `name` before retrying. |
```

| Cannot snapshot multiple volumes together | 9 FAILED_PRECONDITION | Indicates that the specified volumes cannot be snapshotted together because the volumes are not configured properly based on requirements from the SP. | Caller MUST fix the configuration of the volumes so that they meet the requirements for group snapshotting before retrying. |

> | Not enough space to create group snapshot | 13 RESOURCE_EXHAUSTED | There is not enough space on the storage system to handle the create group snapshot request. | Caller SHOULD fail this request. Future calls to CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot MAY succeed if space is freed up. |

Reviewer: > Caller SHOULD fail this request

the same language is used for the same stand alone create snapshot error condition - and i'm wondering why we feel the need to state this so explicitly? e.g. the SP has already indicated a failed RPC operation. is the intent that the CO should reflect this condition back to the user? if not, how does this effect the semantics of CO/SP interaction? (do we really need to state here that error responses should be considered failures by the CO? IMO that's implicitly understood across the board already)

#### `DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshot`

**ALPHA FEATURE**

A Controller Plugin MUST implement this RPC call if it has `CREATE_DELETE_GET_VOLUME_GROUP_SNAPSHOT` capability.
This RPC will be called by the CO to delete a volume group snapshot.
This operation will delete a volume group snapshot as well as all individual snapshots that are part of this volume group snapshot.

This operation MUST be idempotent.
If a group snapshot corresponding to the specified `group_snapshot_id` does not exist or the artifacts associated with the group snapshot do not exist anymore, the Plugin MUST reply `0 OK`.

```protobuf
message DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshotRequest {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // The ID of the group snapshot to be deleted.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string group_snapshot_id = 1;

  // A list of snapshot IDs that are part of this group snapshot.
  // If SP does not need to rely on this field to delete the snapshots
  // in the group, this field MAY be ignored.
  // Some SPs require this list to delete the snapshots in the group.
  // If SP needs to use this field to delete the snapshots in the

>   // group, it MAY report an error when there is a mismatch.

Reviewer: if the SP needs this field to properly execute the operation, and there is a mismatch between the IDs here and the group ID then .. "MAY" seems like a strange choice of constraint. I imagine that the results of such a mismatch in this case fall into one of the following buckets: (A) there is an undetected resource leak (because an individual ID was missing); (B) there is an accidental delete of an individual snapshot (because some individual ID was not actually part of the group); (C) the operation fails because some internal constraint isn't met when individual IDs don't align w/ the group ID (e.g. some internal checksum mismatch when IDs don't completely correlate; the "group bucket" for snapshot data can't be found if exact IDs don't match, etc).

I think this needs to be a lot tighter, in terms of SPs generating error codes when there's a mismatch between individual IDs and group ID. the SP *MUST* be able to detect a mismatch between an individual ID and group ID (if it requires individual IDs in this message). note that the requirements for detecting a mismatch are easier to meet vs. requiring the SP to store a 1:1 mapping between group ID and individual IDs.

if the SP truly doesn't care about this field, because it doesn't need the individual IDs, then it MAY ignore the field - but probably SHOULD log a mismatch if it's able to detect such. because the way that the spec is written, a CO is *very* likely to provide this field every time for this call in order to maximize compat across all SPs (and it's in everyone's interest to detect alignment mismatches).

also, if it returns an error due to a mismatch then how is that reported back to the CO? and what's the mitigation? (there is nothing in the errors table describing this scenario)

Author: Updated the comments to the following:
```
  // If SP does not need to rely on this field to delete the snapshots
  // in the group, it SHOULD check this field and report an error
  // if it has the ability to detect a mismatch.
  // Some SPs require this list to delete the snapshots in the group.
  // If SP needs to use this field to delete the snapshots in the
  // group, it MUST report an error if it has the ability to detect
  // a mismatch.
```
Added a INVALID_ARGUMENT error code for the snapshot id mismatch error.

Author: Addressed the comment here: https://github.com/container-storage-interface/spec/pull/519/commits/8959d25967193aa050f15b0b76f6f6bf0d69d5b6

  // This field is REQUIRED.
  repeated string snapshot_ids = 2;

  // Secrets required by plugin to complete group snapshot deletion
  // request.
  // This field is OPTIONAL. Refer to the `Secrets Requirements`
  // section on how to use this field.
  // The secrets provided in this field SHOULD be the same for
  // all group snapshot operations on the same group snapshot.

>   // The secrets provided in the field SHOULD be passed to both

Reviewer: > The secrets provided .. SHOULD be passed to both ...

secrets aren't passed to "members" (i.e. snapshots), right? they're passed to APIs. IMO this sentence doesn't add value and should be removed (for consistency and clarity).

The CO MUST implement the specified error recovery behavior when it encounters the gRPC error code.

| Condition | gRPC Code | Description | Recovery Behavior |
|-----------|-----------|-------------|-------------------|
| Volume group snapshot in use | 9 FAILED_PRECONDITION | Indicates that the volume group snapshot corresponding to the specified `group_snapshot_id` could not be deleted because it is in use by another resource. | Caller SHOULD ensure that there are no other resources using the volume group snapshot, and then retry with exponential back off. |

#### `GetVolumeGroupSnapshot`

**ALPHA FEATURE**

This optional RPC MAY be called by the CO to fetch current information about a volume group snapshot.

A Controller Plugin MUST implement this `GetVolumeGroupSnapshot` RPC call if it has `CREATE_DELETE_GET_VOLUME_GROUP_SNAPSHOT` capability.

`GetVolumeGroupSnapshotResponse` should contain current information of a volume group snapshot if it exists.
If the volume group snapshot does not exist any more, `GetVolumeGroupSnapshot` should return gRPC error code `NOT_FOUND`.

```protobuf

> message GetVolumeGroupSnapshotRequest {

Reviewer: it's interesting that the "Get" call doesn't have a provision for possibly requiring the individual IDs like the "Delete" call does. that seems dissonant and it's unclear to me how or why some systems would require the individual IDs for a Delete but not for a Get - can someone please provide an illustrating use case?

Author: Maybe we should still keep GetVolumeGroupSnapshot as a separate optional capability. @bswartz and I discussed about this before. At that time, we thought SP should be able to implement Get if they can implement Create/Delete.
@jdef made a good point here.  If SP does not track individual snapshots after the group snapshot is created, then it probably will have problems with both Get and Delete if individual snapshot ids are not provided as an input. Thoughts?

Reviewer 5: I think @jdef is right about this. I can't recall thinking about whether Get did or did not need a list, and I probably just overlooked this. Based on the imaginary CSI driver I have in mind that tracks individual snapshots and has not object representing the group, you would need the list of snapshot IDs to return any kind of aggregated status. Then again, in the driver I have in mind, snapshots are instantly ready to use after being cut, so the mere existing of a group snapshot ID tells you that it's ready to use.

I'm not opposed to requiring the client to provide a list of snapshot ID. It's purely a CO-side burden, and I don't think it will be hard to code the sidecar to have that information available.

Author: Updated: https://github.com/container-storage-interface/spec/pull/519/commits/4ced11bfe8df7994223d3efb60f52eb65f18ddac

  // The ID of the group snapshot to fetch current group snapshot
  // information for.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string group_snapshot_id = 1;

  // Secrets required by plugin to complete
  // GetVolumeGroupSnapshot request.
  // This field is OPTIONAL. Refer to the `Secrets Requirements`
  // section on how to use this field.
  // The secrets provided in this field SHOULD be the same for
  // all group snapshot operations on the same group snapshot.
  map<string, string> secrets = 2 [(csi_secret) = true];
}

message GetVolumeGroupSnapshotResponse {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // This field is REQUIRED
  VolumeGroupSnapshot group_snapshot = 1;
}
```

##### GetVolumeGroupSnapshot Errors

If the plugin is unable to complete the GetVolumeGroupSnapshot call successfully, it MUST return a non-ok gRPC code in the gRPC status.
If the conditions defined below are encountered, the plugin MUST return the specified gRPC error code.
The CO MUST implement the specified error recovery behavior when it encounters the gRPC error code.

| Condition | gRPC Code | Description | Recovery Behavior |
|-----------|-----------|-------------|-------------------|

> | Volume group snapshot does not exist | 5 NOT_FOUND | Indicates that a volume group snapshot corresponding to the specified `volume_group_snapshot_id` does not exist. | Caller MUST verify that the `volume_group_snapshot_id` is correct and that the volume group snapshot is accessible and has not been deleted before retrying with exponential back off. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Volume group snapshot does not exist | 5 NOT_FOUND | Indicates that a volume group snapshot corresponding to the specified `group_snapshot_id` does not exist. | Caller MUST verify that the `group_snapshot_id` is correct and that the volume group snapshot is accessible and has not been deleted before retrying with exponential back off. |
```

If an error occurs before a group snapshot is cut, `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot` SHOULD return a corresponding gRPC error code that reflects the error condition.

> For plugins that supports snapshot post processing such as uploading, CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot SHOULD return 0 OK and ready_to_use SHOULD be set to false after the group snapshot is cut but still being processed. CO SHOULD then reissue the same CreateVolumeGroupSnapshotRequest periodically until boolean ready_to_use flips to true indicating all the snapshots have been "processed" and are ready to use to create new volumes. If an error occurs during the process for any individual snapshot, CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot SHOULD return a corresponding gRPC error code that reflects the error condition. The ready_to_use field for all individual snapshots SHOULD stay false until all the snapshots have been "processed" and are ready to use to create new volumes.

Reviewer 5: Slight rewording:

For plugins that supports snapshot post processing such as uploading, CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot SHOULD return 0 OK and the ready_to_use field SHOULD be set to false after the group snapshot is cut but still being processed. The CO SHOULD issue the CreateVolumeGroupSnapshotRequest RPC with the same arguments again periodically until the ready_to_use field has a value of true indicating all the snapshots have been "processed" and are ready to use to create new volumes. If an error occurs during the process for any individual snapshot, CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot SHOULD return a corresponding gRPC error code that reflects the error condition. The ready_to_use field for each individual snapshot SHOULD have a value of false until the snapshot has been "processed" and is ready to use to create new volumes.

Author: Done

  // Timestamp of when the volume group snapshot was taken.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  .google.protobuf.Timestamp creation_time = 3;

  // Indicates if all individual snapshots in the group snapshot
  // are ready to use as a `volume_content_source` in a
  // `CreateVolumeRequest`. The default value is false.
  // CO MUST wait until all snapshots are ready to use before

>   // setting this field to true.

Reviewer 5: If any snapshot in the list of snapshots in this message have a ready_to_use set to false, the SP MUST set this field to false.
If all of the snapshots in the list snapshots in this message have ready_to_use set to true, the SP SHOULD set this field to true.

Author: Done
